# Collaborative git exercise

> Practice with branches, fetches, merges, and pushes

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Initial code description

`code/01_make_output1.R`

  - generates random numbers
  - saves numbers as a `.rds` object in `output/` folder

`code/02_render_report.R`

  - renders `report.Rmd`

`report.Rmd`

  - reads random numbers generated by `code/01_make_output1.R`
  - makes three histograms

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Collaborative git exercise description

### Determine users

Assign one partner to be *User A* and one partner to be *User B*.

### User A: Confirm code base is stable

*User A* should download and unzip the project files. If needed, move the files/directory to a desired location on *User A*'s computer either using the command line or a file browser.

Once the files are in the desired location, confirm that *User A* can build the report by executing `make`.

- If the report does not build, correct code until it builds correctly

*User B* __does not__ need to download and unzip the project folder because they will download it in a later step from *User A*'s GitHub.

### User A: Initialize git repository

*User A* should initialize a local git repository.

1. Use `git init` to initialize a git repository in your project directory folder
2. Appropriately use `git status`, `git add`, and `git commit` to create your first commit. The commit should include: 
	- all contents of the `code` directory
	- `report.Rmd`
	- `README.md`
	- `Makefile`
	- `.gitignore`
	- the `output` directory (i.e., the `output/.gitkeep` file)

### User A: create a GitHub repository

*User A* should create a GitHub repository using the following steps.

1. Log in to GitHub and create an empty GitHub repository.
- be sure to select the option not to add a README nor a license.
- choose any name for the repository you like
2. *User A* uses `git remote add origin git@github.com:<user_a_github_name>/<user_a_repo_name>` to add *User A*'s GitHub repository as a remote of *User A*'s local repository named `origin`.
- replace `<user_a_github_name>` and `<user_a_repo_name>` with *User A*'s GitHub user name and GitHub repository name, repsectively
- be sure to use the "ssh" style syntax for adding a remote and not "https". I.e., your command should be `git remote add origin git@github.com:...` and __not__ `git remote add origin https://github.com/...`.
- You can confirm what web address was used to add the remote by executing `git remote -v`. - If the output of `git remote -v` shows that `origin` points to `https://github.com/<user_a_github_name>/<user_a_repo_name>`, then *User A* should remove the origin `remote` using `git remote remove origin` try Step 2 again.
3. Use `git push origin <your_branch_name>` to push *User A*'s local repository to GitHub.
- `<your_branch_name>` is probably `main`, but it may be `master` for some of you
4. Refresh the web page for *User A*'s GitHub repository's to confirm that the push was successful.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### User B: Fork and clone the repository

*User B* should now fork and clone *User A*'s repository on GitHub using the following steps.

1. *User B* should navigate to `https://github.com/<user_a_name>/<user_a_repo>` and click "Fork" to create a fork of *User A*'s repository.
- replace `<user_a_name>` with *User A*'s GitHub user name
- replace `<user_a_repo>` with *User A*'s GitHub repository name
- Recall that this creates a copy of *User A*'s GitHub repository on *User B*'s GitHub.
2. *User B* should use `cd` in their terminal to navigate to a directory where they wish to download *User A*'s repository.
3. *User B* should execute `git clone git@github.com:<user_b_name>/<user_b_repo>` to clone the repository.
- be sure to use the `git@github.com:<user_b_name>/<user_b_repo>` syntax and __not__ `https://github.com/<user_b_name>/<user_b_repo>` syntax.
- You can confirm what web address was used to add the remote by executing `git remote -v`.
- If the output of `git remote -v` shows that you accidentally used `https://` syntax in your `git clone` command then *User B* should remove the origin `remote` using `git remote remove origin` and then re-add the remote using "ssh"-style syntax: `git remote add origin git@github.com:<user_b_name>/<user_b_repo>`.
3. *User B* should confirm that a folder called `<user_b_repo>` was added to the current working directory of their terminal.
- E.g., use `cd <user_b_repo>` and `ls` to change working directory into the newly downloaded repository and list its contents.

### User B: Update the repository and submit a pull request

*User B* will now make a new branch and make updates to *User A*'s repo on that branch. *User B* should complete the following steps:

1. Create and checkout a new branch called `binomial` by executing `git checkout -b binomial`.
- recall that this simultaneously creates and checks out a new branch called `binomial`
- confirm that *User B* has switched to the new branch by executing `git branch`
  - you should see a star next to `binomial`
2. Add the following lines to `code/01_make_output.R` (ignore the lines with back ticks):

```r
set.seed(4)
random_numbers4 <- rbinom(100, 1, 0.25)
```

3. Add additional lines of code to save `random_numbers4` object into the `output` folder.
4. Confirm that `random_numbers4` gets created and saved properly (e.g., by running `make random_numbers`).
5. Add a few lines of code to `report.Rmd` to read in `random_numbers4.rds` and then add a new section to `report.Rmd` called "Random numbers 4"
- the contents of the section should be exactly the same as the other sections
- e.g., *User B* can copy/paste the "Random numbers 3" section and appropriately modify its contents
6. Confirm that *User B* can build the report (e.g., by executing `make report.html`)
7. Once *User B* is confident that `report.html` is building properly, they should appropriately use `git add` and `git commit` to make a new commit along the `binomial` branch that includes updates to *both* `code/01_make_random_numbers.R` *and* `report.Rmd`
- include a meaningful commit message
8. Push the `binomial` branch to GitHub.
- `git push origin binomial`
9. Submit a pull request to *User A*'s repository.
- the pull request should request that *User B*'s `binomial` branch be merged into *User A*'s `main` branch.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### User A: test out pull request code

*User A* will now `fetch` the code submitted by *User B*, test it out, and eventually merge it into their `main` branch, thereby closing the pull request.

1. *User A* should add *User B*'s repository as a remote.
- `git remote add <user_b_remote_name> https://github.com/<user_b_name>/<user_b_repo>`
	- in this case, it's OK to use the `https://` syntax, because *User A* does not need to push to *User B*'s repository.
	- "ssh"-style syntax would also be fine here
- replace `<user_b_remote_name>` with whatever you would like to call this remote
- replace `<user_b_name>` with *User B*'s GitHub user name
- replace `<user_b_repo>` with *User B*'s GitHub repository name

2. *User A* should `fetch` from *User B*'s repository.
- `git fetch <user_b_remote_name>`
- Recall that this command downloads the contents of *User B*'s repository, but does not yet put them on any of *User A*'s local branches.

3. *User A* should create and checkout a new branch named `binomial` from the `<user_b_remote_name>/binomial` branch.
- `git checkout -b binomial <user_b_remote_name>/binomial`
- Recall that this creates a new branch in *User A*'s repository called `binomial` that looks exactly like the branch `fetch`'ed from *User B*'s remote.

4. *User A* should test out the code on the `binomial` branch.
- E.g., confirm that the report builds properly when you execute `make`
- If the code does not work, *User A* should make corrections to the code and commit those changes to their `binomial` branch.

5. When *User A* is satisfied that the code works as expected, they should merge the `binomial` branch into `main`.
- `git checkout main`
- `git merge binomial`

6. *User A* should push the updated `main` branch to GitHub.
- `git push origin main`
- Both users should now see *User B*'s pull request as "merged" on GitHub.

### User A: More changes

1. *User A* should create and checkout a new branch called `geometric`.
- `git checkout -b geometric`
- Recall that this simultaneously creates and checks out a new branch called `geometric` in *User A*'s local repository.

2. Add the following lines to `code/01_make_output.R` (ignore the lines with back ticks):

```r
set.seed(5)
random_numbers5 <- rgeom(100, 0.25)
```

3. Add additional lines of code to save `random_numbers5` object into the `output` folder.
4. Confirm that `random_numbers5` gets created and saved properly (e.g., by running `make random_numbers`).
5. Add a few lines of code to load `random_numbers5.rds` in `report.Rmd` and add a new section to `report.Rmd` called "Random numbers 5"
- the contents of the section should be exactly the same as the other sections
- e.g., *User A* can copy/paste the "Random numbers 3" section and appropriately modify its contents
6. Confirm that *User A* can build the report (e.g., by executing `make report.html`)
7. Once *User A* is confident that `report.html` is building properly, they should appropriately use `git add` and `git commit` to make a new commit along the `geometric` branch that includes updates to *both* `code/01_make_random_numbers.R` *and* `report.Rmd`
- include a meaningful commit message
8. *User A* should merge the `geometric` branch into `main`.
- `git checkout main`
- `git merge geometric`
9. *User A* should push both the `geometric` and `main` branches to GitHub
- `git push origin geometric`
- `git push origin main`

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### User B update local repository

1. *User B* should add a remote called `upstream` that points to *User A*'s GitHub repository.
- `git remote add upstream https://github.com/<user_a_name>/<user_a_repo>`
	- in this case, it's OK to use the `https://` syntax, because *User B* does not need to push to *User A*'s repository.
	- "ssh"-style syntax would also be fine here

2. *User B* should `fetch` from the `upstream` remote and merge `upstream/main` into `main`
- `git fetch upstream`
	- Recall that this downloads the contents of *User A*'s repository (i.e., the `upstream` remote) to *User B*'s computer; however, it does not add *User A*'s commits/branches to *User B*'s local branches.
- `git checkout main`
	- *User B* needs to be on their `main` branch to merge in changes from *User A*'s GitHub repository.
- `git merge upstream/main`
	- Recall that this will update *User B*'s local files on the `main` branch to look like *User A*'s files from GitHub.
	- To confirm, *User B* could look in `report.Rmd` and locate the `random_numbers5`-associated code.
3. *User B* should `push` their `main` branch to `origin`.
- `git push origin main`

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Reverse roles and repeat

If you have time, reverse roles of User A and B and repeat the exercise. However, you should not delete the GitHub repository associated with the first run through of the exercise, as you will be graded based on that repository.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Second collaborative git exercise description

In this exercise, we will work on a separate workflow, where both users have push access to the same repository. We will start afresh on this exercise (i.e., we'll be creating a new Github repository and working in different local directories compared to those above).

The basic idea of this workflow is that:

- *User B* will host a GitHub repository
- *User A* __and__ *User B* will have push access to the repository
- the `main` branch of the GitHub repo is the "stable" version of the code
	- neither user will ever push directly to the `main` branch
- each user will use their own `main` branch to track the stable version of the code
- in order for e.g., *User A* to update the stable code base, they will take the following steps:
	- make sure that the local `main` branch is up to date with the remote `main` branch
	- create a local `devel` branch from the local `main` branch
	- make changes to the code on the local `devel` branch
	- push the `devel` branch to GitHub
	- submit a pull request on GitHub to merge `devel` into `main` and request a code review from *User B*
	- *User B* then `fetch`es the remote `devel` branch and tests it out locally
	- when they are satisfied that it works, *User B* merges into `main` 
	- *User B* pushes `main` back to the remote to close the PR
	- Both users update their local `main` branches

### Determine users

Assign one partner to be *User A* and one partner to be *User B*.

### User B: confirm code base is stable

*User B* should download and unzip the project files. If needed, move the files/directory to a desired location on *User A*'s computer either using the command line or a file browser.
- Put the files in a separate directory than the one used above.
- E.g., you could have a directory `git_exercises` that contains two directories called `first_folder` and `second_folder`, where `first_folder` is the git repository used in the exercise above and `second_folder` is the folder that contains the files that you just downloaded and unzipped. 

Once the files are in their desired location, *User B* should confirm that they can build the report (e.g., by executing `make`).
- If the report does not build, correct code until it builds correctly

*User A* __does not__ need to download and unzip the project folder because they will download it in a later step from *User B*'s GitHub.

### User B: Initialize git repository

*User B* should initialize a local git repository.

1. Use `git init` to initialize a git repository in your project directory folder
2. Appropriately use `git status`, `git add`, and `git commit` to create your first commit. The commit should include: 
- all contents of the `code` directory
- `report.Rmd`
- `README.md`
- `Makefile`
- `.gitignore`
- the `output` directory (i.e., the `output/.gitkeep` file)

### User B: Create a GitHub repository

*User B* should create a GitHub repository using the following steps.

1. Log in to GitHub and create an empty GitHub repository.
- be sure to select the option not to add a README nor a license.
- choose any name for the repository you like
2. *User B* uses `git remote add origin git@github.com:<user_b_github_name>/<user_b_repo_name>` to add *User B*'s GitHub repository as a remote of *User B*'s local repository named `origin`.
- replace `<user_b_github_name>` and `<user_b_repo_name>` with *User B*'s GitHub user name and GitHub repository name, repsectively
- be sure to use the "ssh" style syntax for adding a remote and not "https". I.e., your command should be `git remote add origin git@github.com:...` and __not__ `git remote add origin https://github.com/...`.
- You can confirm what web address was used to add the remote by executing `git remote -v`. - If the output of `git remote -v` shows that `origin` points to `https://github.com/<user_b_github_name>/<user_b_repo_name>`, then *User B* should remove the origin `remote` using `git remote remove origin` try Step 2 again.
3. Use `git push origin <your_branch_name>` to push *User B*'s local repository to GitHub.
- `<your_branch_name>` is probably `main`, but it may be `master` for some of you
4. Refresh the web page for *User B*'s GitHub repository's to confirm that the push was successful.

### User B: Add *User A* as a collaborator on the GitHub repository

1. *User B* should navigate to the `Settings` tab of their repository on GitHub.
2. On the left side bar menu, select `Collaborators`.
3. Under `Manage Access` select `Add people` and add *User A* by typing in their GitHub user name.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### User A: Accept invitation to *User B*'s GitHub

1. *User A* should check for an email from GitHub inviting them to join *User B*'s repository as a collaborator.
2. Accept the invitation.

### User A: Clone the repository

1. *User A* should use `cd` in their terminal to navigate to a directory where they wish to download *User B*'s (shared) repository.

2. *User A* should execute `git clone git@github.com:<user_b_name>/<user_b_repo>` to clone the repository.

- Note the use of __*User B*'s user name__ in the above.
- be sure to use the `git@github.com:<user_b_name>/<user_b_repo>` syntax and __not__ `https://github.com/<user_b_name>/<user_b_repo>` syntax.
- You can confirm what web address was used to add the remote by executing `git remote -v`.
- If the output of `git remote -v` shows that you accidentally used `https://` syntax in your `git clone` command then *User A* should remove the origin `remote` using `git remote remove origin` and then re-add the remote using "ssh"-style syntax: `git remote add origin git@github.com:<user_a_name>/<user_a_repo>`.

3. *User A* should confirm that a folder called `<user_b_repo>` was added to the current working directory of their terminal.
	
- E.g., use `cd <user_b_repo>` and `ls` to change working directory into the newly downloaded repository and list its contents.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### User A and B: Confirm that both users have `origin` remote

Both *User A* and *User B* should execute `git remote -v` and confirm that both users have a remote called `origin` that points to `git@github.com:<user_b_name>/<user_b_repo>`.
- Recall that `origin` is an appropriate name for both remotes, because the code for both local repositories "originates" from the same GitHub repository.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### User A: Update the repository and submit a pull request

*User A* will now make a new branch and make updates to the stable code base. *User A* should complete the following steps:

1. Create and checkout a new branch called `devel-titles` by executing `git checkout -b devel-titles`.
- recall that this simultaneously creates and checks out a new branch called `devel-titles`
- confirm that *User A* has switched to the new branch by executing `git branch`
- you should see `main` and `*devel-titles`
2. Change the section headers of the "Random numbers `x`" to read "Distribution `x`" (i.e., sections should be Distribution 1, Distribution 2, and Distribution 3).
3. Confirm that *User A* can build the report (e.g., by executing `make report.html`)
7. Once *User A* is confident that `report.html` is building properly and that the titles have been changed, they should appropriately use `git add` and `git commit` to make a new commit along the `devel-titles` branch that includes updates `report.Rmd`.
- include a meaningful commit message
8. Push the `devel-titles` branch to GitHub.
- `git push origin devel-titles`
9. Submit a pull request to the shared repository.
- the pull request should request that the `devel-titles` branch be merged into the `main` branch.
- request a code review from *User B*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### User B: Test out pull request code

*User B* will now `fetch` the code submitted by *User A*, test it out, and eventually merge it into their `main` branch, thereby closing the pull request.

1. First, *User B* should confirm that their local `main` branch is up to date with the remote `main` branch.
- E.g., check `git status`
2. *User B* should fetch new code from `origin` using `git fetch origin`.
- Recall that this downloads the contents of the shared Github repository (including the `devel-titles` branch), but does not yet integrate them into *User B*'s local repository yet.
3. *User B* should create and checkout a new branch named `devel-titles` from the `origin/devel-titles` branch.
- `git checkout -b devel-titles origin/devel-titles`
- Recall that this creates a new branch in *User B*'s local repository called `devel-titles` that looks exactly like the branch `fetch`'ed from the shared GitHub repository.
4. *User B* should test out the code on the `devel-titles` branch.
- E.g., confirm that the report builds properly when you execute `make` and that the section headers are appropriately changed.

__If the code does not build properly__:

- *User B* should leave comments on the GitHub pull request describing the errors that they are seeing.
- *User A* and *User B* should discuss to determine the source of the errors.
- *User A* should update the code on their local `devel-titles` branch, `add`, `commit`, and `push` to GitHub.
- Once new code has been pushed to GitHub *User B* should retrieve the updated code. There are several ways to do this. The easiest way to do this is probably:
	- *User B* deletes the local `devel-titles` branch, `git branch -d devel-titles`
	- *User B* fetches changes, `git fetch origin`
	- *User B* goes back to Step 3 above.

__If the code does build properly__:

5. When *User B* is satisfied that the code works as expected, they should merge the `devel-titles` branch into `main`.
- `git checkout main`
- `git merge devel-titles`

6. *User B* should then push the updated `main` branch to GitHub.
- `git push origin main`
- Both users should now see *User A*'s pull request as "merged" on GitHub.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### User A and B: Make sure local `main` is up to date

Both *User A* and *User B* should now ensure their local main branch is up to date.

- E.g., both users could use `git fetch origin`, `git checkout main`, `git merge origin/main`
- Or more simply, both users could use `git pull origin main`
- These commands should not do anything for *User B*, since they had already merged `devel-titles` into `main` in the above steps.
- These commands __should do something__ for *User A*, since they had not updated their `main` branch with the changes on the `devel-titles` branch.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### User B: Update the repository and submit a pull request

*User B* will now make a new branch and make updates to the stable code base. *User B* should complete the following steps:

1. Create and checkout a new branch called `devel-colors` by executing `git checkout -b devel-colors`.
- recall that this simultaneously creates and checks out a new branch called `devel-colors`
- confirm that *User B* has switched to the new branch by executing `git branch`
- you should see `main` and `*devel-colors`
2. Change the color of the histograms by modifying lines 35, 42, and 49. E.g., change line 35 to

```r
hist(random_numbers1, col = "gray25")
```

Similarly, add this `col = ` option to the other histograms.

3. Confirm that *User B* can build the report (e.g., by executing `make report.html`)
4. Once *User B* is confident that `report.html` is building properly and that the colors have been changed, they should appropriately use `git add` and `git commit` to make a new commit along the `devel-colors` branch that includes updates `report.Rmd`.
- include a meaningful commit message
5. Push the `devel-colors` branch to GitHub.
- `git push origin devel-colors`
6. Submit a pull request to the shared repository.
- the pull request should request that the `devel-colors` branch be merged into the `main` branch.
- request a code review from *User A*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### User A: Test out pull request code

*User A* will now `fetch` the code submitted by *User B*, test it out, and eventually merge it into their `main` branch, thereby closing the pull request.

1. First, *User A* should confirm that their local `main` branch is up to date with the remote `main` branch.
- E.g., check `git status`
2. *User A* should fetch new code from `origin` using `git fetch origin`.
- Recall that this downloads the contents of the shared Github repository (including the `devel-colors` branch), but does not yet integrate them into *User A*'s local repository yet.
3. *User A* should create and checkout a new branch named `devel-colors` from the `origin/devel-colors` branch.
- `git checkout -b devel-colors origin/devel-colors`
- Recall that this creates a new branch in *User A*'s local repository called `devel-colors` that looks exactly like the branch `fetch`'ed from the shared GitHub repository.
4. *User A* should test out the code on the `devel-colors` branch.
- E.g., confirm that the report builds properly when you execute `make` and that the histogram colors are appropriately changed.

__If the code does not build properly__:

- *User A* should leave comments on the GitHub pull request describing the errors that they are seeing.
- *User A* and *User B* should discuss to determine the source of the errors.
- *User B* should update the code on their local `devel-colors` branch, `add`, `commit`, and `push` to GitHub.
- Once new code has been pushed to GitHub *User A* should retrieve the updated code. There are several ways to do this. The easiest way to do this is probably:
	- *User A* deletes the local `devel-colors` branch, `git branch -d devel-colors`
	- *User A* fetches changes, `git fetch origin`
	- *User A* goes back to Step 3 above.

__If the code does build properly__:

5. When *User A* is satisfied that the code works as expected, they should merge the `devel-colors` branch into `main`.
- `git checkout main`
- `git merge devel-colors`

6. *User A* should then push the updated `main` branch to GitHub.
- `git push origin main`
- Both users should now see *User B*'s pull request as "merged" on GitHub.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### User A and B: Make sure local `main` is up to date

Both *User A* and *User B* should now ensure their local main branch is up to date.

- E.g., both users could use `git fetch origin`, `git checkout main`, `git merge origin/main`
- Or more simply, both users could use `git pull origin main`
- These commands should not do anything for *User A*, since they had already merged `devel-colors` into `main` in the above steps.
- These commands __should do something__ for *User B*, since they had not updated their `main` branch with the changes on the `devel-colors` branch.

